# IMO 2025 Q6

> **Q6**: Consider a 2025×2025 grid of unit squares. Matilda wishes to place on the grid some rectangular tiles, possibly of different sizes, such that each side of every tile lies on a grid line and every unit square is covered by at most one tile.
> 
> Determine the minimum number of tiles Matilda needs to place so that each row and each column of the grid has exactly one unit square that is not covered by any tile.

This is an interesting problem with a surprising solution. I have an interactive visualization at [https://charleslow.github.io/grid_visualization](https://charleslow.github.io/grid_visualization) to explore this problem.

## Initial Attempt

The first instinct is to take an approach like below. That is, we observe that using single row / column rectangular tiles is sufficient to tile the grid. Hence the solution uses $2(n-1)$ tiles if the grid is $n \times n$. I thought this was the solution initially, and tried to prove it but failed.

## Solution

Let's draw a vertical and horizontal line from each uncovered square (call it a "<<hole>>"). Observe there may be `2-4` such lines emanating in the NSEW directions from each hole. Overall, there would be $4n-4$ such lines ($-4$ because there is no line at the first & last row / column). Let's call each of these lines a "<<half-line>>". 

Since each `row, col` pair has one hole, we are assured that a tiling that covers all the half-lines satisfies Matilda (as it will then cover every row and column, except for the holes).

Now the question is, how quickly can we cover the $4n-4$ half-lines with a minimal number of tiles? In other words, how many lines can we clear with each tile we introduce?

Now, it is tricky to analyze the number of lines we clear on each turn, because it depends on the preceding steps. For example, if we had cleared all but one remaining tile on each half-line (show example), then the next step can clear a large number of half-lines. It is hard to reason across multiple turns.

So an important observation:
> **Lemma 1**: The number of holes that each tile *touches* is an upper bound for the number of half-lines cleared after $k$ steps. 
>
> **Proof**. This is quite self-explanatory, as touching a hole is pre-requisite to clearing a half-line.

Lemma 1 shifts the analysis from clearing half-lines to analyzing (and maximizing) the number of holes we touch with every tile we introduce. 

