
# 2 Timothy

In light of the opposition of false teachers that Timothy was facing, Paul writes this personal letter to Timothy to encourage him in his ministry. 

<Do not be ashamed.> The theme of not being ashamed of the gospel is repeated 3 times in the first chapter. In v8, Paul tells Tim to not be ashamed of the <testimony about Jesus> nor of Paul's imprisonment. We generally long to be associated with the upper classes of society, where class is determined by what our present society values, e.g. power, fame, riches, intellect. It is thus counter-intuitive to desire to be associated with what others ridicule and look down upon. The message of Jesus, a crucified criminal, far from its present acceptance in our society, was probably viewed quite differently back in the apostle's day. To identify with Christ thus brings shame and humiliation from at least some members of the public and possibly the false teachers.

The shame of the gospel seems to take on a slightly different note today. It is socially acceptable to be a *Christian*, and being one is even viewed in a slightly positive light sometimes. The shame of the gospel seems to be more of being <too serious> about Jesus. Society smiles at faith that leads one to be kind, successful and full of good works. But it frowns at faith that believes too much, that leads the Christian to try to share his faith or make counter-cultural life decisions. It is ok with talking about our faith in philosophical terms and as a moral compass, but not with a simplistic faith that just believes Jesus is real and that our lives should be ruled by him. To associate with Jesus in this way is thus to associate with something that is despised. In contrast with the desires and aspirations of our society for better and shinier things, it appears and feels foolish to make much of something that does not fit in those categories and has no place in civil conversation.

Thus the Christian finds himself in a tricky situation. Because the shame of the gospel is subtle and seldom articulated, we are subconsciously tempted to skirt around it. For example, in conversation with friends we have not seen in awhile, we feel an implicit pressure to talk about things that they are interested in - technology, finance etc. There is a subtle fear of disapproval or ridicule should we start talking about spiritual matters.

In Paul's case, the shame also comes in the form of chains. He is a condemned criminal in the eyes of society, and subject to various deprivations and humiliation. In light